---
title: Welcome
layout: default
---

# Welcome 

## Quest Objectives

- Learn about the value of Puppet and Puppet Enterprise
- Familiarize yourself with the Quest structure and tool

## The Learning VM

> Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.

> -Arthur C. Clarke

Welcome to the Quest Guide for the Learning Virtual Machine. This guide will be
your companion as you make your way through a series of interactive quests on
the accompanying VM. This first quest serves as an introduction to Puppet and
gives you an overview of the quest structure and the integrated quest tool.
We've done our best to keep it short so you can get on to the meatier stuff in
the quests that follow.

You should have started up the VM by now, and have an open SSH session from your
terminal or SSH client.

If you need to, return to the Setup section and review the instructions to get
caught up. Remember, the credentials to log in to the Learning VM via SSH are:

 * username: **root**
 * password: **puppet**

If you're comfortable in a Unix command-line environment, feel free to take a
look around and get a feel for what you're working with.

## Getting Started

The Learning VM includes a quest tool that will provide structure and feedback
as you progress. You'll learn more about this tool below, but for now, type the
following command to start your first quest: the "Welcome" quest.

    quest --start welcome

## What is Puppet?

*Puppet* is an open-source IT automation tool. The Puppet Domain Specific
Language (DSL) is a Ruby-based coding language that provides a precise and
adaptable way to describe a desired state for each machine in your
infrastructure. Once you've described a desired state, Puppet does the work to
bring your systems in line and keep them there.

The easy-to-read syntax of Puppet's DSL gives you an
operating-system-independent language to specify which packages should be
installed, what services you want running, which users accounts you need, how
permissions are set, and just about any other detail of a system you might want
to manage. If you're the DIY type or have unique needs, you can write the Puppet
code to do all these things from scratch. But if you'd rather not re-invent the
wheel, a wide variety of pre-made Puppet modules can help you get the setup
you're looking for without pounding out the code yourself.

Why not just run a few shell commands or write a script? If you're comfortable
with shell scripting and concerned with a few changes on a few machines, this
may indeed be simpler. The appeal of Puppet is that it allows you to describe all
the details of a configuration in a way that abstracts away from operating
system specifics, then manage those configurations on as many machines as you
like. It lets you control your whole infrastructure (think hundreds or thousands
of nodes) in a way that is simpler to maintain, understand, and audit than a
collection of complicated scripts.

*Puppet Enterprise* (PE) is a complete configuration management platform, with
an optimized set of components proven to work well together. It combines a
version of open source Puppet (including a preconfigured production-grade Puppet
master stack), with MCollective, PuppetDB, Hiera, and more than 40 other open
source projects that Puppet Labs has integrated, certified, performance-tuned,
and security-hardened to make a complete solution for automating
mission-critical enterprise infrastructure. 

In addition to these integrated open source projects, PE has many of its own
features, including a graphical web interface for analyzing reports and
controlling your infrastructure, orchestration features to keep your
applications running smoothly as you coordinate updates and maintenance, event
inspection, role-based access control, certification management, and cloud
provisioning tools.

{% task 1 %}
Now that you know what Puppet and Puppet Enterprise are, check and see what
versions of Puppet are running on this Learning VM. Type the following command:

    puppet -V	# That's a capital 'V'

<!--
---
- execute: puppet -V
-->

You will see something like the following:

_3.7.3 (Puppet Enterprise 3.7.1)_

This indicates that Puppet Version 3.7.3 Puppet Enterprise 3.7.1 are installed.

## What is a Quest?

At this point we've introduced you to the Learning VM and Puppet. You'll get
your hands on Puppet soon enough. But first, what's a quest? This guide contains
collection structured tutorials that we call *quests*. Each *quest* includes
interactive *tasks* that give you a chance to try things out for yourself as you
learn them.

If you executed the `puppet -V` command earlier, you've already completed your
first task. (If not, go ahead and do so now.)

## The Quest Tool

The Learning VM includes a quest tool that will help you keep track of which
quests and tasks you've completed successfully and which are still pending.
We've written a couple of tasks in this quest to demonstrate the features of the
quest tool itself.

{% warning %}

The VM comes with several adjustments to enable the use of the quest tool and
progress tracking, including changes to how bash is configured. Please don't
replace the .bashrc file. If you would like to make changes, append them to the existing file.

{% endwarning %}
{% task 2 %}
<!--
---
- execute: quest --help
-->
To explore the command options for the quest tool, type the following command:

    quest --help

The `quest --help` command provides you with a list of all the options for the
`quest` command. You can invoke the quest command with each of those options,
such as:

    quest --progress     # Displays details of tasks completed
    quest --completed    # Displays completed quests
    quest --list         # Shows all available quests
    quest --start <name> # Provide the name of a quest to start tracking
    progress
	
{% task 3 %}
<!--
---
- execute: quest --progress
-->
Find out how much progress you have made so far:

    quest --progress

{% tip %}
Typing `clear` into your terminal will remove everything on your terminal
screen.
{% endtip %}

While you can use the quest commands to find more detailed information about
your progress through the quests, you can check the quest status display at the
bottom right of your terminal window to keep up with your progress in real time.

{% figure 'assets/terminal.png' %} 

## Structure of this Quest Guide

We've organized the quests for the Learning VM around the belief that the more
quickly you're exposed to real Puppet code in realistic conditions, the more
quickly you'll learn. As far as is reasonable, we've tried to construct quests
around plausible use cases, and to this end, most quests will introduce several
related concepts at once.

The first several quests, up to and including the Modules quest, are your
foundations. Learning about these things is like tying your shoe laces: no
matter where you're trying to get to, you're going to get tripped up if you
don't have a solid understanding of things like *resources*, *classes*,
*manifests*, and *modules*.

We want to show that once you've taken care of these basics, though, there's
quite a lot you can do with Puppet using modules from the Puppet Forge. After
the foundations section, we've included some quests that will walk you through
downloading, configuring, and deploying existing Puppet modules.

Finally, we introduce you to the Puppet language constructs you'll need to get
started writing and deploying your own modules: things like *variables*,
*conditionals*, *class parameters*, and *resource ordering*. With these concepts
under your belt, you'll be in a much better position not just to create your own
Puppet code, but to understand what's going on under the hood of modules you
want to deploy.

## Review

In this introductory quest we gave a brief overview of what Puppet is and the
advantages of using Puppet to define and maintain the state of your
infrastructure.

We also introduced the concept of the quest and interactive task. You tried out
the quest tool and reviewed the mechanics completing quests and tasks.

Now that you know what Puppet and Puppet Enterprise are, and how to use the
quest tool, you're ready to move on to the next quest: The Power of Puppet.
